---
title: CS Basics
---

### Queues
A FIFO Data structure. Elements are inserted at the tail and removed from the head of the queue. 
### Stack
A LIFO Data structure. Elements inserted last at the top will be removed first. Push adds elements to the top of the stack. Earlier inserted elements are lower in the stack hierarchy.
### Process
An executing program is called a process. Important terminology:
1. Program Counter (PC): An index in the code which tells where the program is right now, the line number being executed.
2. Stack: Used to pass arguments and returns values. Say there are two functions `f1` and `f2`, and f1 calls f2. Now f1 will push f2 with all of it's arguments on top of the stack and f2 will retrieve those arguments by popping them out of the stack. Now f2 can return values back to f1 by pushing the return values on top of the stack, and when f1 resumes, it can pop the return values off the stack and obtain them.
3. Heap: Variables and data structures allocated dynamically during program execution are stored here. If automatic garbage collection is not available, this memory that was allocated using calls like `malloc` need to be explicitly freed as well. 
4. Registers: They hold recently accessed variables.
5. Process Snapshot: A collection of the data representing the current state of the process, it's code, the PC, Stack, Heap & registers.

### Computer Arch
CPU executes the actual code and some registers are co-located with the CPU. These are small pieces of memory and can be accessed very very quickly by the CPU. At the next level we have Cache which is a larger memory but slower to access than registers. At the next level is RAM, and even slower, but storage increases. At the final level we have SSDs and HDDs, which are large and slow pools of storage.

When a program is compiled it is converted into machine (virtual or physical) instructions, and these are the executable version of the program. When the program starts executing it becomes a process and the CPU loads these instructions in batches or one by one into memory and then cache and then into registers. The instructions in the cache and registers are the last few access instructions, following a least recently used principle. The data required for execution is also loaded in the same way. Any changes to variable are stored in the reverse order, first in registers, then in cache, and finally in memory. 
### Big O Notation
The worst case complexity of an algorithm's metric (commonly time) as the input is scaled to infinity. 
$O(foo) => A < c*foo$ for some constant c beyond some input size N
### Basic Probability
1. Set: A collection of things.
2. Subset: A collection of things that is part of a larger set.
3. Any event has a probability of happening.
4. If `E1` and `E2` are independent events, $prob(E1 and E2) = prob(E1)*prob(E2)$.
5. In general, $prob(E1 or E2) = prob(E1) + prob(E2) - prob(E1 and E2)$ and $prob(E1 or E2) <= prob(E1) + prob(E2)$.

### DNS
The Domain Name System. Collection of servers used to translate domain names to IP addresses. DNS server returns the IP address which maybe the actual web server or an intermediate group of servers (like a CDN). DNS replies can also contain addresses to other DNS servers which may contain information about our intended domain.
### Graphs
A network of connected nodes (or vertices). A connection is an edge and edges can have weights. X adjacent to Y => X is connected to Y => there is an edge between X and Y. 