---
title: Introduction to Clouds
layout: default
parent: Week 1
nav_order: 2
grand_parent: Concepts 1
---

There are two kinds of clouds:

1. Private Cloud: Accessible only to a specific company's employees.
2. Public Cloud: Accessible to anyone who pays a company for access to it's resources. For example: GCP, AWS, Azure, etc.

> Cloud = lot's of storage + compute cycles nearby

Another way to classify clouds:

1. Single Site Cloud (aka a Datacenter):
   1. Compute nodes clubbed as racks, and switches connect racks.
   2. Have a network topology, commonly hierarchical. For example, a core switch and then top of rack switches below the core switch and each top of rack switch is connected to a rack of servers.
   3. Storage (backend) nodes connected to the network.
   4. Frontend nodes for submitting jobs and receiving client requests.
   5. Software Services.
2. Geographically Distributed Cloud:
   1. Multiple structures as described for the single site cloud.
   2. Each site may or may not have the same structures or services.

Four features new in today's cloud:

1. Massive scale: There are hundreds of thousands of servers per site and 100s of sites and your application can scale to as many servers as it needs.
2. On demand access: Anyone can access the cloud with no contracts whenever they want.
3. Data intensive nature: Huge amounts of data are being generated, analysed and served in real time.
4. New cloud computing/programming paradigms: MapReduce, Hadoop, NoSQL databases, and other tools make it easier to store and query these huge amounts of data efficiently.
   If a problem has at least one of these features, it may be a new problem and if it doesn't have these attributes, it is likely an already solved problem.

Classification of clouds based on the services they provide:

1. HaaS (Hardware as a service): Access to barebones h/w machines. Not good for security.
2. IaaS (Infrastructure as a service): Flexible access to computing resources via virtualisation. Mitigates a lot of security risks of HaaS.
3. PaaS (Platform as a service): Flexible computing infra with a tightly integrated software platform. Easier but less configurable.
4. SaaS (Software as a service): Subset of SOA (Service oriented arch).

Types of computing:

1. Computation intensive computing: CPU is more imp than storage. Small amount of data and v intensive compute.
2. Data intensive computing: Storage throughput is more imp than CPU (relatively). Huge huge amounts of storage with lots of nearby available compute.
