A cloud:
1. 100k's of machines
2. Servers communicate with each other
3. Millions of clients 
4. Clients also communicate with each other

Servers communicate means that servers send and receive messages from one another => it is a distributed system. Similarly clients are also a distributed system. The client system may be  a peer to peer one like BitTorrent which is also a distributed system.

Clouds are a special class of Distributed Systems.

### OS
> The low-level software which handles the interface to peripheral hardware, schedules tasks, allocates storage, and presents a default interface to the user when no application program is running.

### Distributed Systems

The FOLDOC definition is as follows:
> A collection of (probably heterogeneous) automata (programs) whose distribution is transparent to the user so that the system appears as one local machine. This is in contrast to a network, where the user is aware that there are several machines, and their location, storage replication, load balancing and functionality is not transparent. Distributed systems usually use some kind of client-server organisation.

There are two issues with this definition:
1. The collection of programs may not always be transparent to the user as one single machine because if that were true the web wouldn't be called a distributed system and if it were true, one site being down would mean all sites are down but this is not the case.
2. The definition says that they usually use some kind of client server organisation but again that is not true and would mean that peer to peer networks like BitTorrent are not distributed systems.

Our attempt at defining Distributed systems is as follows:

> A distributed system is a collection of entities, each of which is **autonomous**, **programmable**, **asynchronous** and **failure-prone**, and which communicate through an **unreliable communication medium**.

1. Entities: processes running on some device, and they are programmable.
2. Autonomous: standalone, if left alone it will continue to run
3. Asynchronous: Each entity or process runs according to it's own clock and these clocks are not synchronised. 
4. Failure prone: Each entity may crash at any point of time and may recover. 
5. Unreliable communication medium: Entities' messages to one another may be dropped completely, or delayed for very very long periods of time. 