Gossip attempts to solve the Multicast problem. 

## Multicast

Suppose there are a number of nodes which need to be able to talk to each other (send and receive messages) which are essentially processes on some computer connected to the internet or on the network.
A multicast sender sends a message to a number of nodes in the network (but not all, that is broadcast).
The two requirements for Multicast are:
1. Fault tolerance. All non faulty recipients should receive the multicast.
	1. Nodes may crash
	2. Packets may be lost or delayed indefinitely
2. Scalability

The multicast protocol (executed at both Tx and Rx) sits at the application level. Some protocols may talk to the underlying network protocols like IP Multicast. 

One way to send multicast messages is to use a `for-loop` and iterate over all the recipient nodes and send TCP or UDP packets to them. But it quickly grows in O(N).

One way to deal with it is to use a tree based approach by developing a spanning tree among the nodes. If the tree is balanced, the height of the tree is logN and max latency to any node is O(logN) which is much better than O(N). This way the overhead for each node is also almost constant. Receive one copy of the message, and send it out to all your children. The drawback is that if any node fails, all it's descendant nodes in the system may never receive the messages. Now we'll have to continuously spend time and bandwidth to repair and maintain the tree. The receivers send ACK messages when they successfully receive messages and NACK to repair the trees. 

For example, the SRM protocol send NACK messages when it hasn't received messages it's expecting or generally in some time. When these NACKs are received, the nodes closer to the root send the latest multicasts they have or missing multicasts. To prevent NACK storms NACKs are sent with random delays and exponential backoff. 

The other example is RMTP. It uses ACKs instead of NACKs. Receivers send a single ACK for multiple messages they have received together, and if ACKs for any messages are missing, those messages are resent to the receiver. To avoid ACK storms, the receivers send ACKs only to designated receivers.

Both the above examples run in O(N) time complexity. 

## Gossip Protocol

Suppose the system has N nodes, and consider one multicast sender with one multicast message, and we want to send the message to all the nodes in the group. Every `t` units of time, periodically, the sender picks `b`(gossip fan out; common value = 2) random targets and sends them the message (called the gossip message) usually using UDP. These nodes are picked with replacement. Once a node receives a gossip, it is said to be infected by the gossip. Now each receiver acts as a sender and sends copies of the message with the same parameters, `b` and `t`. This way there may be nodes that receive multiple duplicate messages. Eventually all nodes receive the message. In a real system the nodes are running the gossip periods independently of each but for analysis we may assume they are synchronised. 

The above described gossip protocol is called the **Push Gossip Protocol**. Each node can gossip each message individually or a set of messages together, or other schemes like recency or priority can also be used. 

The other kind of gossip protocol is **Pull Gossip Protocol**. In this variant of the Gossip protocol, instead of receiving gossip messages from sender, nodes send out gossips all the time which don't always contain messages but queries for messages that may have been received since the last gossip. 

Hybrid variants also do exist of the above two protocols.